---
layout: post
title: Key learnings as a Marie Curie PhD Fellow
date: 2022-07-01
permalink: /about-phd/key-learnings
tag: [about-phd]
---

* <b>Interview</b>. Take the time and prepare yourself for it. Ask the committee if they expect you to give a presentation about yourself, your interests, the research topic. Check the definitions and any possible theoretical questions that can test your knowledge about the research topic. Yep, the committee can ask you to explain in your own words a concept or a definition. They will also ask about your technical skills. Give them examples especially if you have any past research experience that will be handy and can prove you know how to make use of it and bring value to your project and to the ITN. If you worked previously in multicultural environments as well as under pressure, take the opportunity and mention them. It will give you bonus points because the project will require you to work with so many (young) scientists coming from around the world and lots of tight deadlines.
* <b>Payments</b>. Once accepted, my advice is to check with the financial department your payslip and make sure you are paid accordingly. Most universities are already familiar with this scholarship, the regulations and how it is being calculated but it might still not happen so. You can check your first payment with your colleagues from the project if luckily, their host country is the same, or, ask the MCAA community (by the way, for any advice or a second opinion).
* <b>First task</b>. Be patient and take your time to read, study and understand what your project is about. This is the best investment you can do at the beginning of your PhD. You are setting your foundation, and better it is up-to-date and advanced so that you can think creatively and build upon it. Almost any PhD starts with a systematic review, which is also your first chapter of the thesis unless the topic is novel that it does not make sense to write such summaries. Whatever you read, document and keep track of everything: publications, books, presentations, videos, conferences' abstracts or posters.
* <b>Publications</b>. I chose to invest time to prepare manuscripts in parallel with whatever work I was doing. This was the advice I received myself and considered it to follow. The publications can become chapters of your PhD thesis later, which will be much easier to put everything together when the time arrives. Also, this eventually can give you a bit of confidence when you have your Viva. A manuscript to be published has to be reviewed at least by three scientists.
* <b>Unforeseen situations</b>. Oh, and so many of them can be! If your PhD depends on others, think and prepare a backup plan. For example, you are developing a computational model for which data are required. Things might not happen the way it is described initially and the responsible partner(s) might not provide you with the datasets, either not on time, or not at all, or the datasets might not allow you to make use of it. You still want to validate your model and showcase its applicability. The best source for data is the literature and available databases. Make use of them from the start and do not wait for the data to come, it might happen, it might happen with delay or not at all. Reasons can be different including a pandemic.
* <b>Ownership</b>. Everything you do is paid by public money, which is great but maybe not. It depends on your long-term objective. Ask yourself in the very beginning, what kind of outcomes do you seek for yourself and your career? And design your plan based on this. If you aim for a patent, that is possible, but it is going to be under the umbrella of your host university or host company, and I doubt it to be possible to take it further as a start-up by yourself (at least, I am not aware of such successful stories yet). Also, a patent requires lots of attention, this will imply a delay in publishing your work and potentially getting your PhD done. However, if you are e.g., into the open science movement, then it is perfect, you will be able to feel proud of yourself that everything you do is accessible to anyone without any fees as the costs are being covered.
* <b>About the UK system</b>. There are no mandatory classes to be followed the way it is in other EU countries where the first year is fully booked with lectures. However, you might have to pass the MPhil exam, an oral exam, that allows someone to pursue the actual PhD, so to say, to follow a career in science. This is the case of an MSCA fellow (an admission criteria), as you obtained your previous master’s degree outside the UK. The exam itself is after the first year and it implies the submission of a report so that the reviewer becomes familiar with your research project. I enjoyed those discussions with my reviewer during the exam. It gave me the confidence to follow the plans we were aiming for to achieve as many of the initial objectives.

